# FACTOR

```
FACTOR  {
         VARIABLES=VAR_LIST,
         MATRIX IN ({CORR,COV}={*,FILE_SPEC})
        }

        [ /METHOD = {CORRELATION, COVARIANCE} ]

        [ /ANALYSIS=VAR_LIST ]

        [ /EXTRACTION={PC, PAF}]

        [ /ROTATION={VARIMAX, EQUAMAX, QUARTIMAX, PROMAX[(K)], NOROTATE}]

        [ /PRINT=[INITIAL] [EXTRACTION] [ROTATION] [UNIVARIATE] [CORRELATION] [COVARIANCE] [DET] [KMO] [AIC] [SIG] [ALL] [DEFAULT] ]

        [ /PLOT=[EIGEN] ]

        [ /FORMAT=[SORT] [BLANK(N)] [DEFAULT] ]

        [ /CRITERIA=[FACTORS(N)] [MINEIGEN(L)] [ITERATE(M)] [ECONVERGE (DELTA)] [DEFAULT] ]

        [ /MISSING=[{LISTWISE, PAIRWISE}] [{INCLUDE, EXCLUDE}] ]
```

The `FACTOR` command performs Factor Analysis or Principal Axis
Factoring on a dataset.  It may be used to find common factors in the
data or for data reduction purposes.

The `VARIABLES` subcommand is required (unless the `MATRIX IN`
subcommand is used).  It lists the variables which are to partake in the
analysis.  (The `ANALYSIS` subcommand may optionally further limit the
variables that participate; it is useful primarily in conjunction with
`MATRIX IN`.)

If `MATRIX IN` instead of `VARIABLES` is specified, then the analysis
is performed on a pre-prepared correlation or covariance matrix file
instead of on individual data cases.  Typically the [matrix
file](../matrix/index.md#matrix-files) will have been generated by
[`MATRIX DATA`](../matrix/matrix-data.md) or provided by a third
party.  If specified, `MATRIX IN` must be followed by `COV` or `CORR`,
then by `=` and `FILE_SPEC` all in parentheses.  `FILE_SPEC` may
either be an asterisk, which indicates the currently loaded dataset,
or it may be a file name to be loaded.  See [`MATRIX
DATA`](../matrix/matrix-data.md), for the expected format of the file.

The `/EXTRACTION` subcommand is used to specify the way in which
factors (components) are extracted from the data.  If `PC` is specified,
then Principal Components Analysis is used.  If `PAF` is specified, then
Principal Axis Factoring is used.  By default Principal Components
Analysis is used.

The `/ROTATION` subcommand is used to specify the method by which the
extracted solution is rotated.  Three orthogonal rotation methods are
available: `VARIMAX` (which is the default), `EQUAMAX`, and `QUARTIMAX`.
There is one oblique rotation method, viz: `PROMAX`.  Optionally you may
enter the power of the promax rotation K, which must be enclosed in
parentheses.  The default value of K is 5.  If you don't want any
rotation to be performed, the word `NOROTATE` prevents the command from
performing any rotation on the data.

The `/METHOD` subcommand should be used to determine whether the
covariance matrix or the correlation matrix of the data is to be
analysed.  By default, the correlation matrix is analysed.

The `/PRINT` subcommand may be used to select which features of the
analysis are reported:

- `UNIVARIATE` A table of mean values, standard deviations and total
  weights are printed.
- `INITIAL` Initial communalities and eigenvalues are printed.
- `EXTRACTION` Extracted communalities and eigenvalues are printed.
- `ROTATION` Rotated communalities and eigenvalues are printed.
- `CORRELATION` The correlation matrix is printed.
- `COVARIANCE` The covariance matrix is printed.
- `DET` The determinant of the correlation or covariance matrix is
  printed.
- `AIC` The anti-image covariance and anti-image correlation matrices
  are printed.
- `KMO` The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy and the
  Bartlett test of sphericity is printed.
- `SIG` The significance of the elements of correlation matrix is
  printed.
- `ALL` All of the above are printed.
- `DEFAULT` Identical to `INITIAL` and `EXTRACTION`.

If `/PLOT=EIGEN` is given, then a "Scree" plot of the eigenvalues is
printed.  This can be useful for visualizing the factors and deciding
which factors (components) should be retained.

The `/FORMAT` subcommand determined how data are to be displayed in
loading matrices.  If `SORT` is specified, then the variables are sorted
in descending order of significance.  If `BLANK(N)` is specified, then
coefficients whose absolute value is less than N are not printed.  If
the keyword `DEFAULT` is specified, or if no `/FORMAT` subcommand is
specified, then no sorting is performed, and all coefficients are
printed.

You can use the `/CRITERIA` subcommand to specify how the number of
extracted factors (components) are chosen.  If `FACTORS(N)` is
specified, where N is an integer, then N factors are extracted.
Otherwise, the `MINEIGEN` setting is used.  `MINEIGEN(L)` requests that
all factors whose eigenvalues are greater than or equal to L are
extracted.  The default value of L is 1.  The `ECONVERGE` setting has
effect only when using iterative algorithms for factor extraction (such
as Principal Axis Factoring).  `ECONVERGE(DELTA)` specifies that
iteration should cease when the maximum absolute value of the
communality estimate between one iteration and the previous is less than
DELTA.  The default value of DELTA is 0.001.

The `ITERATE(M)` may appear any number of times and is used for two
different purposes.  It is used to set the maximum number of iterations
(M) for convergence and also to set the maximum number of iterations for
rotation.  Whether it affects convergence or rotation depends upon which
subcommand follows the `ITERATE` subcommand.  If `EXTRACTION` follows,
it affects convergence.  If `ROTATION` follows, it affects rotation.  If
neither `ROTATION` nor `EXTRACTION` follow a `ITERATE` subcommand, then
the entire subcommand is ignored.  The default value of M is 25.

The `MISSING` subcommand determines the handling of missing
variables.  If `INCLUDE` is set, then user-missing values are included
in the calculations, but system-missing values are not.  If `EXCLUDE` is
set, which is the default, user-missing values are excluded as well as
system-missing values.  This is the default.  If `LISTWISE` is set, then
the entire case is excluded from analysis whenever any variable
specified in the `VARIABLES` subcommand contains a missing value.

If `PAIRWISE` is set, then a case is considered missing only if
either of the values for the particular coefficient are missing.  The
default is `LISTWISE`.

