@c PSPP - a program for statistical analysis.
@c Copyright (C) 2019 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
@c or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@c A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
@c Free Documentation License".
@c

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

This manual is a guide to PSPP internals.  Its intended audience is
developers who wish to modify or extend PSPP's capabilities.  The use
of PSPP is documented in a separate manual.  @xref{Top, ,
Introduction, pspp, PSPP Users Guide}.

This manual is both a tutorial and a reference manual for PSPP
developers.  It is ultimately intended to cover everything that
developers who wish to implement new PSPP statistical procedures and
other commands should know.  It is currently incomplete, partly
because existing developers have not yet spent enough time on writing,
and partly because the interfaces not yet documented are not yet
mature enough to making documenting them worthwhile.

PSPP developers should have some familiarity with the basics of PSPP
from a user's perspective.  This manual attempts to refer to the PSPP
user manual's descriptions of concepts that PSPP users should find
familiar at the time of their first reference.  However, it is
probably a good idea to at least skim the PSPP manual before reading
this one, if you are not already familiar with PSPP.
