\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c PSPP - a program for statistical analysis.
@c Copyright (C) 2017, 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
@c or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@c A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
@c Free Documentation License".

@c %**start of header
@setfilename pspp-dev.info
@settitle PSPP
@c For double-sided printing, uncomment:
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@include version-dev.texi

@macro cmd{CMDNAME}
\CMDNAME\
@end macro
@macro struct{TAG}
@code{struct \TAG\}
@end macro
@macro union{TAG}
@code{union \TAG\}
@end macro
@macro enum{TAG}
@code{enum \TAG\}
@end macro
@macro func{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@dircategory Math
@direntry
* PSPP Developers Guide: (pspp-dev). Reference for PSPP developers.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual is for GNU PSPP version @value{VERSION},
software for statistical analysis.

Copyright @copyright{} 1997, 1998, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2010, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title PSPP Developers Guide
@subtitle GNU PSPP Statistical Analysis Software
@subtitle Release @value{VERSION}
@author Ben Pfaff
@author John Darrington
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents


@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNU PSPP Developers Guide

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

This manual describes the file formats that PSPP supports.

@menu
* System File Format::          Format of PSPP system files.
* SPSS Viewer File Format::     Format of SPSS Viewer (SPV) files.
* SPSS TableLook File Formats:: Formats of .stt and .tlo files.
* Encrypted File Wrappers::     Common wrapper for encrypted SPSS files.
* Portable File Format::        Format of PSPP portable files.
* SPSS/PC+ System File Format:: Format of SPSS/PC+ system files.

* GNU Free Documentation License:: License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@include dev/system-file-format.texi
@include dev/spv-file-format.texi
@include dev/tlo-file-format.texi
@include dev/encrypted-file-wrappers.texi
@include dev/portable-file-format.texi
@include dev/pc+-file-format.texi

@include fdl.texi

@bye
